That summer I was out in the Pacific with the Bureau
of Ships. And I was out there on Guam, and in
America, and Saipan, and Tinian. And I talked to
Ellis Johnson, a man from the Bureau of Ordnance,
who'd brought these mines out and organized their
being sold in the harbors of the Japanese coast.
And by that time, I was involved in quite a few
different kinds of oceanographic problems. The
principal one was the problem of surf
forecasting.
And there were two aspects of this. One was that
if you looked at the waves coming into shallow
water, the waves would be bent crowded and spread
apart, just like the sonar used the same ray
theory. And this was because of the bottom
topography. You could tell quite a bit about the
bottom topography from the behavior, from the
aerial photographs of the waves. The other thing
was that Sparadrap and Monk, in this country, and
Harold Sparadrap and Walter Monk,
people in England had developed a method for
forecasting surf, knowing where a storm was, and
how strong the storm was, and over what area it
spread. You could tell where the waves would go,
and how high they would be on a beach, and what the
other characteristics were, how far apart they'd
be, and things like that. And this was a useful
thing for the amphibious landing. They were
planning two amphibious landings in Japan.
And one was called Operation Olympic, and the
other was called Operation Coronet.
And I was on Admiral Spruance's staff. His staff
was planning these landings. Spruance was very
much against it. Not against me being there, but
against the landing.
Because he thought it would be deadly, millions of
Japanese would die, and a lot of our guys would die.
He just didn't like it at all. And I was there at the
time when the Indianapolis
never arrived. I remember this very well.
Somebody said, where's the Indianapolis?
Don't know. We had not gotten an arrival message
from Miller.
It turned out that she had left about ten days
before from Saipan,
Formanon, and never sent an arrival message. And
the person who should have been watching for this
missed it. Missed the fact that she had not sent an
arrival message. And that she'd been sunk by a
torpedo by a Japanese submarine. And these poor
guys were in the water for five or six days. Most of
them were lost.
And we heard about this as it came in. First, not
knowing where she was, and then looking for her and
finding her. Not finding her, but finding the
survivors. She was the ship that had brought out
the two atomic bombs. to Saipan. There were only
two, that's all there were. And they were then, of
course, I didn't know that at all. All I knew was
that Indianapolis was lost on the way to Manila. So
then I went from, Scruitt sent me from Guam to
Manila to report to be on Admiral Turner's staff in
their intelligence.
I was just climbing the ladder of the El Dorado,
which was Turner's command ship, and the word came
over the loudspeaker that a bomb dropped on
Hiroshima. That was the end of the war right there.
Thank God neither of these operations, the
Carmel, the Olympics, and the bomb, and all the
work that we'd done on the intelligence, on the
wave forecasting, and the bottom topographic
mapping, It was, again, lost, but thank God.
It was actually used, particularly in both wave
forecasting and surf forecasting, and
the estimation of bottom depths were both used in
several amphibious operations.
This was the, this is really the earliest big thing
that Walter Monk was involved with, developing
this wave force, this surf forecasting method.
He and Sparadip were constantly having trouble
getting cleared, because they were both born,
they were both born abroad. In fact, Walter was not
allowed to continue with the Navy Radio and Sound
Lab, because he couldn't get the wind clearing.
And he joined the Army and enlisted in the Army for a
couple of years. And finally, he was sprung by a man
named Cywell. He had become a major in the Air
Force. He had organized an oceanographic unit in
the Air Force.
And Cywell had also captured Sparragut by the same
process of making sure he wasn't cleared and
giving them cleared to work for it. Not cleared,
but kind of captured by his group. And they
developed the surf forecasting method, wave
forecasting method, while they were working in
this group that's on your side.
And then later they started a wave forecasting
school here at Scripps. Lots of guys, lots of both
Navy aerologists and Air Force meteorologists,
studied this and
learned the method, learned the technique, and
applied it. It was applied particularly in
Sicily, and it was applied in a very interesting
way in Normandy. Two men who did that were Charlie
Bates and a man named Crowell. Crowell now teaches
at UCLA, and I think Bates works for Noah. And what
they did was to say that the waves were going to be
pretty high, but not impossibly high. And so
Eisenhower decided that they'd go ahead, and the
Germans didn't believe it. They didn't believe
that they would go ahead. Nobody would be out in the
night like this. But they were, and that was one of
the elements of surprise that made made the
landings a success. How'd you
choose Mary Sears as the head of the oceanographic
unit in the hydrographic office?
I didn't choose her, she chose me.
She appeared in my office in the Bureau of Ships. I
needed somebody. By that time, we needed somebody
out of the hydrographic office to do various kinds
of mapping and descriptive jobs. And she had gone
through a wave indoctrination course. And I very
well remember her coming into my office, and there
was this little fat little figure. And she stood up
at a full height of about five feet three, rigidly
at attention. She was just scared to death. And
this was a shock. Put it in my alley. I asked her to
sit down.
And then I got her assigned out there to the
hydrographic office.
She then built up, she went to town, built up this
huge, not huge, but big oceanographic unit, which
wrote intelligence. Not exactly papers, but
intelligence. Chapters for the descriptive
oceanographic intelligence, descriptive
oceanography, which is important to submarines
and to all kinds of ships, destroyers,
particularly dealing with the propagation of
underwater sound and with such things as the
density layers that the submarines could sit on
and
the conditions for
wave conditions that would be related to
amphibious operations and things like that. Also
air-sea rescue. There were a lot of applications
of oceanography around the edges of the naval
operations. One of the things that Sverdrup did
was to make current charts, which we then turned
into handkerchief charts that we gave to
aviators. And these current charts, suppose you
came down in a raft. You could look which way you
wanted to go, which is the best way for the current.
For the current, both the current and the wind had
about an equal effect on a raft. If the current and
the wind were in the same direction, you'd go much
faster than the wind. If they were in the opposite
direction, and which was stronger, the current or
the wind, which way you'd go. And this, of course,
is a probabilistic thing, that the currents never
went in just one direction, but most of the time
they'd go in a certain quadrant, during a certain
season of the year. And this was used also by
air-sea rescue people to estimate where a downed
aviator would be.
Another thing I got involved with in the Bureau of
Ships was smoke forecasting. This was, again,
essentially a turbulence phenomenon.
A man named Jeffries Wyman at Woods Hole was the
leader of this group.
The problem was which way would a smoke screen go
and how long would it stay close to the ground or
close to the surface of the sea? When would it rise?
How much would it spread? How long would it be
useful? How much smoke would you have to put in it to
make it be useful and things like that? This work
was really never used. The Navy really never did
like smoke screens. But what was used was
something that came out of this.
And this was done by a man named Joe Cesare Lombardi
Barber. He's now a professor of English at the
University of California, Santa Cruz. Was a
professor of English then, at least a young
assistant professor of English. But he got in a
sailor's suit, and he was assigned to me. And he was
a project officer for the smoke work. And he got
tired of this. this research part and decided he
wanted to be more active. So he went out into the
Pacific with some smoke generators. And it turned
out that
in these big operations like Okinawa and Iwo Jima
and some of the other big landing operations,
there were lots and lots of ships lying too
offshore. And these were just sitting ducks for
the kamikazes. The kamikazes were awful, more
than a nuisance. They were quite a serious
business. So what they did was to spread a blanket
of smoke over the fleet. Whenever there was a
kamikaze signal or alarm, they'd get out these
smoke generators, not get them out, but turn on
these smoke generators. This blanket, the whole
area was smoke, and the poor damn kamikazes
couldn't tell where they were or where the ships
were. So this worked very well. This was really Joe
Barber's very special job.
Well, now, did the hydrographic office result in
creating the ONR? Is that where the ONR came from?
No, no, not at all. OK.
There was something called a coordinator. There
was a guy called the coordinator of research and
development in the Navy Department,
headed by an admiral. And I'm damned if I can
remember his name.
But he had on his staff a whole collection of very
bright young guys, one regular naval officer
named Bob Conrad and half a dozen young
lieutenants, one of whom was Tim Wakelund. who
more recently was Assistant Secretary of the
Navy, a man named John Burwell, a man named Bruce
Old, who's now with R.T.D. Little and was until
recently Foreign Secretary of the National
Academy of Engineering,
a man named Kraus.
But his admiral's name began with F.
And they
sat around and talked about what was needed for
research for the Navy, these guys. And they really
drew up a plan for what has become ONR. It was first
called the Office of Inventions and Research,
ORI, Office of Research and Inventions.
And the first head of it was a man named Bowen.
Harold Bowen had been head and director of the
Naval Research Laboratory. The Naval Research
Laboratory became part of ORI, as did the Admiral
de Flores group, the group that developed
simulators of all kinds, training simulators.
Louis de Flores.
And then they had a headquarters organization
that supported basic research in a variety of
fields and applied naval research in a variety of
fields. It tried to support applied research. And
this became then the Office of Naval Research
after a while. And the whole notion was, and it was
really a revolutionary notion, that the
government should support basic research, which
would be that research that scientists wanted to
do, not the research which somebody in the Navy
wanted to
do. Alan Waterman, who'd been in the NDRC, became
the civilian head of it. And then there was a very
bright staff, and I was one of them. although I was
in a sailor suit part of the time. Manny Piore, who
later became chief scientist of IBM. Fred Seitz,
who's now the president of Rockwell University.
Minna Reese, who later became dean of, graduate
dean of
City University of New York. Joe Weil, who has been
dean of Hunter College.
Randall Robertson, who later became chief
scientist of NSF.
These people were just as gifted a group of
scientific administrators as you could possibly
imagine, all headed by Bob Conrad. He
was never chief, because he was only a captain, but
he was the inspiration of the group.
They had really invented the notion of supportive
scientists in their discipline doing the things
that they wanted to do. I was head of the geophysics
branch. We had a rule that we would automatically
turn down a project, which the guy said, this is
going to have all these naval applications.
We also automatically approved a project which
was for less than $5,000. Those were our two
fundamental rules of operation. But we
basically, in those days, didn't have advisory
committees or anything. It was peer review, which
everybody talks about so much now. We thought that
was for the birds. We decided that this guy was good
and this guy wasn't, and that was that. One of the
things we did. And in my geophysics branch, there
were three of us. One was a man named Dan Rex, who was
also in the naval masseur suit, as I was. And a man
named Earl Dressley, meteorologist. These other
two people were meteorologists.
And
we And we decided that oceanography was somewhat
different than, say, physics or chemistry or most
kind of geophysics, because these ships were such
expensive instruments. But as far as
oceanography was concerned, we tried to support
broad institutional programming rather than a
specific individual project. And that's still
done pretty much all the time. And what they do now
is primarily support the ships in a separate fund
and then support individuals or groups in their
research proposals. All right, now I'm jumping
ahead of my story for a second, but do you think the
ONR is still as hard science oriented as it was
then? Is it not more research oriented now? I mean
in terms of special mission research oriented.
Mission oriented. Mission oriented, right. It
was research-oriented. It's now
mission-oriented. OK. That's right.
Well, I think that's true. The quality of the staff
of O&R has progressively declined over the past 25
years, 30 years, just about 30 years now. It is 30
years, yeah. The staff in the early days had some
Well, as I say, these guys who all became great men.
Whereas now, it's very unlikely that anybody will
ever hear of any of them. Except that they're
devoted public servants. And the people in
oceanography at least still have very high regard
for them. Walter Monk, for example, thinks
they're great. And people at Woods Hole think so,
too. I think so, too, but they're not able to really
hold up against the overbearing weight of the
bosses who are imbued with this idea of directed or
not so much directed as applied research. It
doesn't affect oceanography quite as much as it
does other fields because maybe in general still
thinks that anything you find out about the ocean
may be useful to him sometimes. That was one of the
great things we put across during the war. And as
you probably know, the hydrographic office,
which regarded Mary Sears and her group as
essentially an unnecessary pimple, now become
the oceanographic office.
And the hydrographer, The hydrographer is now the
oceanographer, showing the ability of the Navy to
absorb things. What happened to Mary Sears, by the
way? She went back to Woods Hole. Okay. And she
continued research on plankton, particularly
zooplankton.
But more particularly, she became editor of the
Journal of Deep Sea Research. And she's a
marvelous editor. And she really built up that
journal as a great scientific journal. She was
also the clerk of the Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution Corporation and the board of
trustees, and really a
very important person in the Woods Hole hierarchy
as a sane, gentle, good person. She also became
very much interested in politics. And she, for
many years, was chairman of the school committee,
the Falmouth School Committee. And that was
really her principal interest, was the school
committee on Republican politics, on Cape Cod.
She never did much science. either before or after
the war, but I guess the most important single
thing she ever did was that she was the chairman of
the committee that organized the first
International Oceanographic Congress, which
was held at the United Nations in 1959. And, you
know, she did a job like that, she just secured
that. So strong-minded and gentle behaved.
What was the ONR Joint Task Force Number One in
1946? That wasn't ONR. Joint Task Force One was the
Bikini atomic bomb explosion. OK, and that
doesn't come with ONR. You don't go to that from
ONR, then? No, I did. I transferred from the Bureau
of Ships to ONR right in the middle of that
operation. But I was on detached duty on Admiral
Blandy's staff all during the time of the McKinney
test. Actually, I was on Ralph Sawyer's. Ralph
Sawyer was the chief scientist. I was on his ship,
the Kenneth Whitey. But we were both on Admiral
Blandy's staff.
And I was in charge of the oceanographic, all
aspects of the oceanographic and the marine
biological work. Excuse me a minute. I've got to go
to the back. Sure.